Bad Robot Productions is an American film and television production company founded on May 27, 1999, and led by J. J. Abrams as CEO. The company is responsible for the television series Alias, Lost, Fringe, Person of Interest, Revolution, and Westworld alongside producing notable film franchises, including Cloverfield, the Star Trek reboot trilogy, Mission: Impossible, and the Star Wars sequel trilogy.

History
Bad Robot was originally based at Touchstone Television, but was moved by J. J. Abrams to Paramount Pictures and Warner Bros. Television, after his contract with ABC expired in 2006. Bad Robot produced Lost in association with ABC Studios, formerly Touchstone Television. The two companies jointly produced Six Degrees and What About Brian. The deal was first recommended and presented in 1999 as part of a presentation deal, with J.J. Abrams being contracted to Disney. In 2004, Thom Sherman joined Bad Robot Television as president of the studio. The company had developed presentation pitches for ABC and The WB, with none of them going to series.
Abrams is CEO of Bad Robot. In May 2015, Ben Stephenson left the BBC where he had been head of drama to lead Bad Robot Television. Lindsey Weber once led Bad Robot's feature film division.
The production logo has appeared since 2001, featuring a red rectangular headed robot running through a meadow silhouetted until it appears suddenly in front of the camera, followed by voices provided by two of Abrams's children, Henry and Gracie, saying "Bad robot!"
In February 2013, it was announced that Bad Robot would be partnering with the Valve Corporation to produce possibly a Half-Life or Portal film in the distant future. In August 2015, Valve released a new beta game mode to Team Fortress 2, PASS Time, which Bad Robot worked on. On July 7, 2016, the PASS Time game mode became official. In August 2013, Bad Robot released a trailer on YouTube entitled "Stranger", rumoured to be Abrams' next film or television project, perhaps even a Lost spin-off, but it was finally explained to be promoting S., Abrams and Doug Dorst's new novel, as a new trailer for S. was released in the following month. In February 2017, it was announced Julius Avery is attached to direct a Paramount coproduction, the World War II zombie film Overlord, from screenwriter Billy Ray.

Bad Robot held a base in Santa Monica, California, in a building which is incorrectly labeled on purpose as the home of the fictional "National Typewriter Company" because Abrams "likes typewriters — and misdirection."
In June 2018, the company announced a spin-off venture formed with the Chinese video game publisher Tencent to launch Bad Robot Games for the development of video games on mobile, computer and consoles, with Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment as a minority investor. Bad Robot Games will develop and publish new and existing IPs including titles related to Abrams' works and other Bad Robot Production content, with Tencent holding the rights for distribution in China. 
The division was originally led by Dave Baronoff, who previously worked on the Cloverfield franchise and was developing Spyjinx as a joint project between Bad Robot Productions and Epic Games (also partially owned by Tencent), while Tim Keenan, who helped develop Duskers, served as the creative director.
In 2020, Anna Sweet was brought on as the CEO of Bad Robot Games. Mike Booth also joined in December 2020, managing the company's newly created in-house development studio. By February 2022, he had taken on the role of chief creative officer.
In 2006, Bad Robot teamed up with Paramount Pictures and Warner Bros. Television for a $60 million development deal that lasted through 2018.
In late 2018, it was announced that Bad Robot was leaving Paramount and seeking a new overall deal. In January 2019, it was announced that Universal, Disney, and Warner Bros. were the top three studios battling it out for what could be a record breaking overall deal including theme parks, music labels, TV, merchandising, and streaming services as Bad Robot plans on ramping up production significantly in the coming years. It was also announced that Bad Robot would be co-producing a remake of the British series The Wrong Mans for American network Showtime along with BBC Studios, but Showtime later cancelled the project.
Bad Robot launched a subsidiary record label called Loud Robot in late 2018, in partnership with Capitol Music Group. Loud Robot is headed by co-general managers McKee Floyd and Nicky Berger along with Charles Scott, who currently heads Bad Robot's music division and has been the leading music supervisor for the company's films. Artists signed to the label include Cleveland-born rapper Nnena, neo soul singer/songwriter UMI, Nashville, Tennessee-based alternative rock artist Chaz Cardigan, and London-based rhythm and blues artist DWY.
On September 12, 2019, Bad Robot officially announced a new five-year overall deal with WarnerMedia.  According to The Hollywood Reporter, WarnerMedia agreed to pay Bad Robot at least $250 million (plus various financial incentives) to produce feature films, television shows, video games, and digital content.
On May 25, 2021, Abrams announced that a Portal film adaptation, which has been in development since 2013, was still in production and a script has been written for the film. In November 2021, the company launched its podcast division with a multi-year first-look deal at Spotify.
On April 25, 2022, it was announced that Bad Robot will team up with Mattel Films and Warner Bros. Pictures to produce a live-action Hot Wheels film based on the toy line of the same name. Most recently, in December 2024, the company had extended its deal with Warner Bros. Pictures.
In November 2025, it was reported that Abrams sold the Santa Monica property housing the Bad Robot headquarters for US$31 million to Black Bear Pictures. He began scaling back the production house's operations in April 2026, closing its office in Los Angeles and moving it to New York.

Filmography
Films
Upcoming films
TV series
Shorts
Video games
Awards and recognition
Nominations
2002 Emmy Award Nomination, Outstanding Writing for A Drama Series (Alias)
2005 Emmy Award Nomination, Outstanding Writing for A Drama Series (Lost)
2007 Golden Globe Award Nomination, Best Television Series – Drama (Lost)
Wins
2005 Emmy Award Winner, Outstanding Drama Series (Lost)
2005 Emmy Award Winner, Outstanding Directing for A Drama Series (Lost)
2006 Golden Globe Award Winner, Best Television Series – Drama (Lost)

References
External links
Official website
iOS App Action Movie FX.  On iTunes https://apps.apple.com/us/app/action-movie-fx/id489321253
"Bad Robot Productions Signs Far-Reaching Production Deals With Columbia Pictures, Paramount Pictures and Warner Bros. Television" (Press release). Time Warner. July 15, 2006.
Andreeva, Nellie; Siegel, Tatiana (July 17, 2006). "Abrams Builds His Robot". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 14, 2008.