Hayley Elizabeth Atwell (born 5 April 1982) is an English actress. After appearing in various West End productions, Atwell gained popularity for her roles in period dramas, appearing in the films Brideshead Revisited (2008), The Duchess (2008) and the miniseries The Pillars of the Earth (2010); for the latter two, she was nominated for a British Independent Film Award and a Golden Globe Award, respectively.
Atwell rose to prominence with her portrayal of Agent Peggy Carter in the Marvel Cinematic Universe film Captain America: The First Avenger (2011), a role she reprised in later productions such as the ABC television series Agent Carter (2015–2016). Atwell also starred in the fantasy films Cinderella (2015), Christopher Robin (2018) and Peter Rabbit 2: The Runaway (2021), and had a leading role in the action films Mission: Impossible – Dead Reckoning (2023) and Mission: Impossible – The Final Reckoning (2025). For her work on stage, Atwell has received Laurence Olivier Award nominations for her leading performances in The Pride (2013) and Rosmersholm (2020).

Early life
Hayley Elizabeth Atwell was born on 5 April 1982 in London, the only child of Allison Cain, who is English, and Grant Atwell, an American photographer from Kansas City, Missouri. Atwell has dual citizenship.
After attending Sion-Manning Catholic Girls' School in London, she took her A-Levels at the London Oratory School.
Atwell took two years off to travel with her father and work for a casting director. She then enrolled at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, where she trained for three years, graduating in 2005 with a bachelor's degree in acting.

Career
2005–2009: Early roles and breakthrough
Atwell made her professional stage debut in  Prometheus Bound (2005) at the Sound Theatre in London, portraying Io, a maiden exiled by Zeus. Her role received positive reviews with the British Theatre Guide praising her performance, writing that she "makes us respond to the anguish without for a moment inviting a chuckle at her bandaged hands". In 2006, she starred as the protagonist's wife, Bianca, in Women Beware Women at the Royal Shakespeare Company. The Guardian praised Atwell for projecting "the right seductive beauty".
Atwell appeared in two productions from 2007 to 2008 at the Royal National Theatre, both directed by Nicholas Hytner: Man of Mode and Major Barbara. In the former, she portrayed Belinda, a SoHo PR worker and for the latter, she received an Ian Charleson Commendation.
Atwell made the transition to film roles with her first major role coming in Woody Allen's 2007 film Cassandra's Dream, playing stage actress Angela Stark. In 2008, she also appeared in The Duchess, which earned her a Best Supporting Actress nomination at the British Independent Film Awards. Later that year, Atwell appeared in the Miramax film Brideshead Revisited.
In 2009, Atwell made her West End debut as Catherine, the adopted niece in a troubled household, in Lindsay Posner's A View From the Bridge. Variety praised her for having an "ideal freshness" and girlishness while still able to shift into uncontrolled rage; her performance was later nominated for an Olivier Award. Later in the year, Atwell appeared as '415' in AMC Television's November 2009 miniseries The Prisoner, a remake of the 1967–68 series by the same name.

2010–2016: Established actress and the Marvel Cinematic Universe
In 2010 Atwell appeared in Channel 4's adaptation of William Boyd's Any Human Heart, and later that year, Ken Follett's miniseries Pillars of the Earth for which she received a Golden Globe Award nomination.
In April 2010, Atwell was cast as the love interest in a then-forthcoming film about Captain America as part of the Marvel Cinematic Universe. She first starred as Peggy Carter in the 2011 American superhero film Captain America: The First Avenger. MTV Networks' NextMovie.com named her one of the "Breakout Stars to Watch for in 2011". She also voiced Carter in the 2011 video game Captain America: Super Soldier. Following a short break from the theatre, Atwell later starred in Alexi Kaye Campbell's 2011 production of The Faith Machine, directed by Jamie Lloyd at the Royal Court Theatre.
In 2013, Atwell starred in BBC Two's adaptation of William Boyd's espionage novel, Restless. In February of that year, she also starred in "Be Right Back", an episode in Charlie Brooker's critically acclaimed science fiction television series Black Mirror. Atwell received critical praise, with critics deeming her performance one of the best of the series. That same year, Atwell also worked with Alexi Kaye Campbell and Jamie Lloyd again in a revival of The Pride at Trafalgar Studios. Her performance gained her a second Olivier Award nomination for Best Actress. That year, she also appeared in the Marvel One-Shot short film Agent Carter.

Atwell returned to Marvel for the 2014 film Captain America: The Winter Soldier, and in the 2015 films Avengers: Age of Ultron and Ant-Man. As Carter, she appeared in two episodes of the ABC television show Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., and as the lead role in Agent Carter, which aired from 2015 to 2016. Agent Carter was cancelled by ABC on 12 May 2016. She also provided Carter's voice in Lego Marvel's Avengers and Avengers: Secret Wars. In 2015, Atwell played Cinderella's mother in Disney's live action adaptation of Cinderella directed by Kenneth Branagh.
In February 2016, Atwell was cast in the ABC series Conviction. The series aired 13 episodes between October 2016 and January 2017; in May 2017, ABC announced it had been cancelled.

2017–present: Return to theatre and Mission Impossible
Atwell starred as Margaret Schlegel in BBC One's 2017–2018 miniseries, Howards End, based on the classic E.M. Forster novel and adapted by playwright Kenneth Lonergan. In 2018, she played Evelyn Robin, the wife of the titular character in Disney's live action Winnie-the-Pooh film Christopher Robin directed by Marc Forster and co-starring with Ewan McGregor.

Atwell returned to the stage in 2018 in Dry Powder at the Hampstead Theatre and later appeared in Josie Rourke's Measure for Measure at the Donmar Warehouse, opposite Jack Lowden. The production gained critical acclaim, with The Daily Telegraph adding that it was "beautifully staged and expertly performed". As a result of positive reception, the play's run was extended.
In 2019, Atwell starred opposite Tamara Lawrance in a three-part BBC adaptation of Andrea Levy's novel The Long Song, about a slave on a sugar plantation in 19th-century Jamaica. She also reprised the role of Peggy Carter in Avengers: Endgame. In September 2019, it was announced that Atwell would star in Mission: Impossible – Dead Reckoning Part One and Mission: Impossible – The Final Reckoning, both directed by Christopher McQuarrie and scheduled to be theatrically released in the United States in 2023 and 2025, respectively. In 2020, Atwell began hosting the podcast series True Spies. In 2021, early reviews for Peter Rabbit 2: The Runaway revealed Atwell as part of the film's voice cast as Mittens the cat. In 2022, Atwell would again reprise her role as Peggy Carter/Captain Carter in Doctor Strange and The Multiverse of Madness.  That same year saw her partnered with The Picturehouse as part of the Picturehouse Ambassador Program as part of her own program Hayley Selects.
In December 2024, it was reported that Atwell would reprise her role of Peggy Carter in Avengers: Doomsday, scheduled to be released on 18 December 2026. During the Xbox Showcase in June 2026, Atwell was revealed to be portraying the villain Isabel in Fable, set to release on 23rd February 2027.

Public image
Described as the "queen of period-drama" by Emine Saner, journalist writing for The Guardian, Atwell has been praised by directors for "the professional example she sets" and her work in period-drama films and television shows. Atwell received an Ian Charleson Commendation for her work in Major Barbara (2009), and has received three Laurence Olivier Award nominations, first for her work in A View from the Bridge (2009), then in 2011 for her work in the revival of The Pride, and again in 2020 for her performance as Rebecca West in Rosmersholm. Atwell was also nominated for a WhatsOnStage Award for her role in The Pride.

Personal life
In 2010, Atwell lived in a flat in London. As of 2015, she had sporadic six-month stints in Los Angeles to be close to the production of Agent Carter, although she still retained her personal home in London. Atwell began a relationship with music producer Ned Wolfgang Kelly in 2022. In April 2023, they announced their engagement. The couple are married. Atwell gave birth to their child in 2024. As of 2025, the family live in south-west London.
During the filming of Captain America: The First Avenger in 2010, Atwell took a three-month course in art history and haiku at the Open University. Atwell is a video game enthusiast.
In October 2017, at the time of the accusations against Harvey Weinstein, a story emerged that, during filming of Brideshead Revisited in 2007, Weinstein had told Atwell she looked like a "fat pig" on screen and should eat less. Atwell later said that someone unconnected to Weinstein had suggested she lose weight to look more like a flapper. She also said that she did not believe that Weinstein was a sex addict, but a predator who should be punished for harassing women.
In a 2015 interview, Atwell discussed how her role as Peggy Carter influenced a then-recent tweet she made to her Twitter followers about having her image digitally altered on the cover of a German magazine. When one visitor to her page asked her, "Why are you so beautiful?", she retorted: "Why am I so photoshopped?" In the interview, Atwell stated: "It's important that young girls understand what photoshop is. I do feel a certain amount of responsibility now that I'm playing Peggy."
In 2025, Atwell said she was almost nine months pregnant while shooting one of the fight scenes in Mission: Impossible — The Final Reckoning. Atwell stated that she was offered to have a stunt double perform for her, but she replied: "No, I’ve worked too hard, let me do it!"

Political views and activism
In 2016, Atwell described feeling "very affected" by both Brexit and the election of Donald Trump, saying there was a "dark underbelly" of xenophobia and misogyny.
Alongside other British actors, Atwell joined a demonstration in London in support of the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike in the U.S.

Filmography
Film
Television
Video games
Stage
Radio
Awards and nominations
References
External links

Hayley Atwell at IMDb