Jacob Benjamin Gyllenhaal (born December 19, 1980) is an American actor. Known for his performances on screen and stage, he has received numerous accolades, including a BAFTA Award, as well as nominations for an Academy Award, three Golden Globe Awards, three Tony Awards, and a Primetime Emmy Award. Born into the Gyllenhaal family, he is the son of film director Stephen Gyllenhaal and screenwriter Naomi Foner, and the younger brother of actress Maggie Gyllenhaal. 
Gyllenhaal began acting as a child, making his debut in City Slickers (1991), followed by roles in his father's films A Dangerous Woman (1993) and Homegrown (1998). His breakthrough came as Homer Hickam in the biopic October Sky (1999), which was followed by starring roles in the thriller Donnie Darko (2001), the romantic comedy The Good Girl (2002), and the disaster film The Day After Tomorrow (2004). He earned praise for his performance as Jack Twist in Ang Lee's romantic drama Brokeback Mountain (2005), including the BAFTA Award for Best Supporting Actor and an Academy Award nomination. 
Gyllenhaal emerged as a leading man with roles in acclaimed films such as Zodiac (2007), End of Watch (2012), Prisoners (2013), Nightcrawler (2014), Southpaw (2015), Nocturnal Animals (2016), Stronger (2017), and Wildlife (2018). His other box office successes include Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time (2010), Source Code (2011), Everest (2015), and Spider-Man: Far From Home (2019), which became his highest grossing film. He has since starred in various action and thriller projects, including the films The Guilty (2021), Ambulance (2022) and Road House (2024), as well as the Apple TV series Presumed Innocent (2024).
Gyllenhaal has performed on stage, starring in a West End production of the play This Is Our Youth (2002) and Broadway productions of the musical Sunday in the Park with George (2017) as well as the plays Constellations (2014) and Sea Wall/A Life (2019), the last of which earned him a nomination for the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play. Aside from acting, he is vocal about political and social issues.

Life and career
1980–2000: Early life and career beginnings
Jacob Benjamin Gyllenhaal was born on December 19, 1980, in Los Angeles, California, United States, to screenwriter Naomi Foner (née Achs) and film director Stephen Gyllenhaal. He has an older sister, actress Maggie Gyllenhaal. Gyllenhaal's father, who was raised as a Swedenborgian, is a Christian of Swedish and English descent and is a descendant of the Swedish noble Gyllenhaal family. Gyllenhaal's mother was born in New York City to an Ashkenazi Jewish family from Russia and Poland, and Gyllenhaal considers himself Jewish. Gyllenhaal was born with a lazy eye and has been wearing corrective lenses since he was six years old. On his 13th birthday, he volunteered at a homeless shelter as a "Bar Mitzvah-like act", because his parents wanted to give him a sense of gratitude for his privileged lifestyle.
As a child, Gyllenhaal was regularly exposed to filmmaking due to his family's ties to the industry. His parents encouraged his artistic expression and allowed him to audition for acting roles, but usually forbade him to accept the roles if he were cast, as they wanted him to stay in school. They also insisted that he support himself with summer jobs, which included working as a lifeguard and busboy. He was allowed to make his acting debut in the comedy City Slickers (1991) as the son of Billy Crystal's character, but was not permitted to appear in The Mighty Ducks (1992) because it would have required him to leave home for two months. Gyllenhaal was allowed to appear in his father's productions several times, including A Dangerous Woman (1993), which also featured his sister Maggie; "Bop Gun", a 1994 episode of the series Homicide: Life on the Street; and the comedy film Homegrown (1998). He appeared alongside Maggie and their mother in two episodes of Molto Mario, an Italian cooking show on the Food Network. Prior to his senior year in high school, the only other film not directed by his father that Gyllenhaal appeared in was the little-known children's film Josh and S.A.M. (1993).
Gyllenhaal's first lead role in a film was in October Sky, Joe Johnston's 1999 adaptation of the Homer Hickam autobiography Rocket Boys, in which he portrayed a high school student from West Virginia who aspires to become a rocket scientist. Gyllenhaal was 17 during filming, and was tutored on set because he was still in school and taking advanced classes. The film was positively received and earned $32 million, and was described in the Sacramento News and Review as Gyllenhaal's "breakout performance". After graduating from the Harvard-Westlake School in Los Angeles in 1998, Gyllenhaal began studying Eastern religions and philosophy at Columbia University, where Maggie was a senior; their mother had attended Columbia as well. Gyllenhaal was a resident of the John Jay Hall dormitory, and after studying Buddhism at the university, he began to practice mindfulness in his everyday life. He dropped out of Columbia after two years to concentrate on acting, and later reflected that he had probably enrolled at the university to please his parents.

2001–2004: Donnie Darko to the London stage
Gyllenhaal's second lead film role was in Richard Kelly's science fiction psychological thriller Donnie Darko (2001). The film was not a box office success upon release, but it eventually became a cult favorite. Gyllenhaal plays Donnie Darko, a troubled teenager who experiences visions of a humanoid rabbit named Frank who tells him that the world is coming to an end. Gyllenhaal's sister Maggie plays Donnie's sister in the film. Reviewing the film for Culture Vulture, Gary Mairs wrote that Gyllenhaal "manages the difficult trick of seeming both blandly normal and profoundly disturbed, often within the same scene."
Gyllenhaal's next role was Pilot Kelston in Highway (2002) alongside Jared Leto. His performance was described by one critic as "silly, clichéd and straight to video". Gyllenhaal had more success starring opposite Jennifer Aniston in The Good Girl, which premiered at the 2002 Sundance Film Festival; he also starred in Lovely and Amazing with Catherine Keener. In both films he played an unstable character who begins a reckless affair with an older woman. Gyllenhaal later described these as "teenager in transition" roles. He later starred in the romantic comedy Bubble Boy, which was loosely based on the story of David Vetter. The film received generally negative reviews from critics, with Paul Clinton of CNN calling it "stupid and devoid of any redeeming features".
Following Bubble Boy, Gyllenhaal starred with Dustin Hoffman, Susan Sarandon and Ellen Pompeo in Moonlight Mile (2002) as a young man coping with the death of his fiancée. The film, which received mixed reviews, was loosely based on writer-director Brad Silberling's personal experiences following the murder of his girlfriend, Rebecca Schaeffer. In his theatrical debut, Gyllenhaal starred on the London stage in Kenneth Lonergan's 2002 West End revival of This Is Our Youth at the Garrick Theatre. He had decided to try stage acting because every actor he looked up to had done theater work. The play ran for eight weeks, with Gyllenhaal winning the Standard Theatre Award for Outstanding Newcomer.
Gyllenhaal was almost cast as Spider-Man for the sequel film Spider-Man 2 (2004), due to director Sam Raimi's concerns about the health of Tobey Maguire, who had played the character in Spider-Man (2002). Maguire recovered, however, and starred in the film. Gyllenhaal and Maguire later co-starred in Brothers (2009), and resemble each other enough that Gyllenhaal has jokingly complained about taxi drivers calling him "Spider-Man". In 2003, Gyllenhaal auditioned for the role of Batman in the superhero film Batman Begins, and was almost offered the part, but it went to Christian Bale. Gyllenhaal subsequently appeared in the science fiction film The Day After Tomorrow (2004), with Dennis Quaid portraying his character's father.

2005–2011: Brokeback Mountain and leading roles
In 2005, Gyllenhaal appeared with Gwyneth Paltrow and Anthony Hopkins in the drama Proof, in which he played a graduate student who seeks to publish a revolutionary mathematical proof. The film received generally positive reviews. The same year, he starred as a U.S. Marine deployed during the Gulf War in Sam Mendes's Jarhead. The film earned generally favorable reviews, with Stephen Hunter of The Washington Post praising Gyllenhaal for effectively expressing his character's intelligence.
In Brokeback Mountain (2005), Gyllenhaal and Heath Ledger starred as young men who meet as sheep herders and embark upon a sexual relationship that begins in the summer of 1963 and lasts for 20 years. The film was often referred to in the media as "the gay cowboy movie", although there were differing opinions about the sexual orientations of the characters. The film won numerous accolades, including three Academy Awards, four Golden Globes, four British Academy Film Awards, and the Golden Lion at the 62nd Venice Film Festival. Gyllenhaal was nominated for Best Supporting Actor, an award which went to George Clooney for Syriana. Gyllenhaal and Ledger won the 2006 MTV Movie Award for Best Kiss. Shortly after the 2006 Academy Awards, Gyllenhaal was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

Gyllenhaal was critical of the way Brokeback Mountain director Ang Lee disconnected from the actors once filming began, although he praised Lee for his sensitive approach to the story. When asked about his kissing scenes with Ledger in Brokeback Mountain, Gyllenhaal said, "As an actor, I think we need to embrace the times we feel most uncomfortable." When asked about the more intimate scenes with Ledger, Gyllenhaal likened them to "doing a sex scene with a woman I'm not particularly attracted to". Following the release of Brokeback Mountain, rumors circulated regarding the actor's sexual orientation. When asked about such gossip during an interview, Gyllenhaal said: You know it's flattering when there's a rumor that says I'm bisexual. It means I can play more kinds of roles. I'm open to whatever people want to call me. I've never really been attracted to men sexually, but I don't think I would be afraid of it if it happened.
Gyllenhaal narrated the 2005 animated short film The Man Who Walked Between the Towers, based on Mordicai Gerstein's book of the same name about Philippe Petit's famous highwire stunt. As the guest host of Saturday Night Live in January 2007, Gyllenhaal wore a sparkly evening dress and sang the song "And I Am Telling You I'm Not Going" from the musical Dreamgirls, dedicating it to his "unique fan base ... the fans of Brokeback". The same year, Gyllenhaal starred in David Fincher's mystery thriller Zodiac about the Zodiac Killer. He played Robert Graysmith, a San Francisco Chronicle political cartoonist. In preparation for the role, Gyllenhaal videotaped Graysmith so he could study his mannerisms. The film received favorable reviews, with Paul Byrnes of The Sydney Morning Herald calling Gyllenhaal "terrific" in his role. He next starred opposite Meryl Streep, Alan Arkin and Reese Witherspoon in 2007's Rendition, a Gavin Hood-directed political thriller about the U.S. policy of extraordinary rendition. Although it garnered a mixed response, New York magazine's David Edelstein called Gyllenhaal "compelling ... he's a reticent actor. But he builds that limitation into the character". Two years later, he co-starred with Tobey Maguire and Natalie Portman in Jim Sheridan's Brothers, a 2009 remake of Susanne Bier's Danish film of the same name. It was met with mixed reviews and moderate box office returns, but Anthony Quinn of The Independent thought Gyllenhaal and Maguire gave "honest performances". Gyllenhaal has also claimed that Maguire's performance in the film influenced his acting throughout his career.
The following year, Gyllenhaal played the lead role in Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time, an adaptation of the video game of the same name, produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and released by Disney. He starred opposite Anne Hathaway in the romantic-comedy Love & Other Drugs, released on November 24, 2010, which gained him a Golden Globe Award nomination. The Guardian's Philip French welcomed Gyllenhaal's choice of a comic role, in contrast to his previous film roles, but thought the film "stumbles badly". For his sole project in 2011, he portrayed Colter Stevens, a U.S. Army Aviation captain, in the 2011 time-travel thriller Source Code. Despite noting the film's unrealistic plot, Peter Howell of the Toronto Star praised the prime performances of the cast.

2012–2018: Critical acclaim and Broadway debut
Gyllenhaal starred alongside Michael Peña in David Ayer's action thriller End of Watch, about two Los Angeles street cops. The film, for which Gyllenhaal was also an executive producer, was released in September 2012 and received positive reviews, with Roger Ebert deeming it "one of the best police movies in recent years, a virtuoso fusion of performances and often startling action" and Salon's Andrew O'Hehir stating that the film was "at least the best cop movie since James Gray's We Own the Night, and very likely since Antoine Fuqua's memorable Training Day (which, not coincidentally, was written by Ayer)". To prepare for the role, Gyllenhaal took tactical training and participated in actual police ride-alongs with co-star Peña to help establish the language of the characters.

He served as a jury member for the 62nd Berlin International Film Festival that was held in February 2012. Also in 2012, Gyllenhaal made his Off-Broadway debut in Nick Payne's play If There Is I Haven't Found It Yet at the Roundabout Theatre Company's Laura Pels Theatre. 2013 saw Gyllenhaal appear in two films directed by Denis Villeneuve, whom Gyllenhaal describes as "an older brother". The first, the thriller Prisoners, starred Gyllenhaal as a detective named Loki in search of the abductor of two young girls. Rolling Stone critic Peter Travers praised Gyllenhaal's "exceptional" performance in the film. In their second collaboration, Gyllenhaal portrayed the dual role of a history teacher and his doppelgänger in the thriller Enemy. The following year, he produced and starred in the crime thriller Nightcrawler, earning Golden Globe Award, Actor Award, and BAFTA Award nominations for his performance. His miss in the Best Actor Oscar category was considered by many to be a snub. Ben Sachs of the Chicago Reader called Gyllenhaal's performance "attention-grabbing" and said that he "creates a memorable screen presence".
Gyllenhaal debuted on Broadway in Payne's Constellations at the Samuel J. Friedman Theatre opposite Ruth Wilson, also in her Broadway debut. The production opened in January 2015 and closed in March of the same year. That same year, he starred in the comedy Accidental Love, which was filmed in South Carolina with Jessica Biel, as well as Antoine Fuqua's sports drama Southpaw. Writing for The Independent, Geoffrey Macnab called his portrayal of a boxer in Southpaw "plausible" and complimented his "emotional vulnerability", despite an unoriginal plot. He then portrayed Scott Fischer in Baltasar Kormákur's Everest, based on the 1996 Mount Everest disaster; the film was a commercial success, grossing $203 million worldwide. Finally, he appeared in Jean-Marc Vallée's comedy-drama Demolition, playing an investment banker Davis Mitchell, who rebuilds his life after losing his wife. The Village Voice's Bilge Ebiri praised his performance, writing, "He nails Davis's boyish curiosity, the quiet, wide-eyed uncertainty of someone discovering the world for the first time." He also served as a jury member for the main competition of the 2015 Cannes Film Festival.
In 2016, he starred in Tom Ford's neo-noir thriller Nocturnal Animals, based on the 1993 novel Tony and Susan by Austin Wright. The film received positive reviews, and Gyllenhaal was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role. The Sydney Morning Herald's Sandra Hall praised Gyllenhaal's brilliant portrayal of his two roles, while Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times wrote that his performance contained "rich emotional shadings" and escalating intensity that becomes overwhelming. In October 2016, he appeared in four benefit concert performances of the Stephen Sondheim and James Lapine musical Sunday in the Park with George at the New York City Center as the titular character. Alexis Soloski of The Guardian gave the performance a perfect five-star review and hailed Gyllenhaal's superb singing. Starting in February 2017, Gyllenhaal reprised the role at the reopened Hudson Theatre on Broadway. Ben Brantley of The New York Times praised his "searing theatrical presence, in which his eyes are his center of gravity." He was scheduled to appear in Lanford Wilson's Burn This on Broadway under the direction of Michael Mayer in 2017. However, a new production of Burn This took place in 2019 with Adam Driver appearing, with Gyllenhaal's production having reportedly been abandoned.
In 2017, Gyllenhaal starred as astronaut David Jordan in the science fiction horror film Life; Slant Magazine's Eric Henderson stated that Gyllenhaal was "dead behind the eyes from his first scene". He also had a supporting role in the action-adventure film Okja and starred in the drama Stronger, based on Boston Marathon bombing survivor Jeff Bauman. In his review of the latter, The Independent's Geoffrey Macnab complimented Gyllenhaal's versatility and "outstanding" portrayal of Bauman. The following year, he co-starred in the drama Wildlife opposite Carey Mulligan, in which he plays a father who temporarily abandons his family to take a dangerous job. It is based on the 1990 novel of the same name by Richard Ford. Ella Kemp, writing for Sight & Sound magazine, praised the chemistry of the lead actors which "fizzes with an effortless dynamism". He also had a role in the Western drama The Sisters Brothers (2018).

2019–present: Action and thriller films
Gyllenhaal reunited with Nightcrawler director Dan Gilroy in the thriller film Velvet Buzzsaw, in which he plays art critic Mort Vandewalt. The film premiered at the 2019 Sundance Film Festival and was distributed by Netflix. Variety's Peter Debrudge opined that Gyllenhaal was "relishing another of those cartoonishly camp performances". That same year, Gyllenhaal played comic book villain Mysterio / Quentin Beck in the superhero film Spider-Man: Far From Home, a sequel to Spider-Man: Homecoming, set within the Marvel Cinematic Universe. It was one of the highest-grossing films of the year. He appeared alongside Tom Sturridge in Sea Wall/A Life, a double bill of monologues by Nick Payne and Simon Stephens, at the Hudson Theatre on Broadway in 2019. He garnered a Tony Award nomination for Best Actor in a Play for his performance. Gyllenhaal also lent his voice for the animation Spirit Untamed (2021). That same year, he played detective Joe Baylor in the crime thriller The Guilty, a remake of the Danish film of the same name.
In 2022, he starred as a criminal in Michael Bay's action thriller Ambulance; the film received mixed reviews from critics. Gyllenhaal also voiced a farmer in the Disney animation Strange World. He appeared in Guy Ritchie's The Covenant (2023) and Doug Liman's action film Road House (2024). Following the success of Road House, his production company, Nine Stories Productions, signed a first-look deal with Amazon MGM Studios.
In 2024 it was announced that Gyllenhaal would return to Broadway playing Iago in the 2025 revival of William Shakespeare's tragedy Othello starring opposite Denzel Washington. In June 2024, he joined the cast of the upcoming science fiction monster film The Bride! in an undisclosed role.

Public image
In 2006, Gyllenhaal was named by People magazine as one of the "50 Most Beautiful People", and one of the "Hottest Bachelors". He was ranked number 35 in a 2013 Empire poll of The 100 Sexiest Movie Stars. In a poll conducted by Glamour, Gyllenhaal was selected as one of the Sexiest Men of The Year 2018.

Personal life
Family and relationships
Gyllenhaal's godmother is the actress Jamie Lee Curtis, and he has two godfathers: the actor and director Paul Newman (1925–2008), and the cinematographer Robert Elswit. Gyllenhaal is the godfather of Matilda Rose Ledger (born 2005), the daughter of his Brokeback Mountain co-stars Heath Ledger and Michelle Williams.
Gyllenhaal began dating the actress Kirsten Dunst in 2002 after his sister Maggie, who starred with Dunst in Mona Lisa Smile, introduced them; they separated in 2004 on friendly terms. He dated his Rendition co-star Reese Witherspoon from 2007 until 2009; the singer-songwriter Taylor Swift from October 2010 to January 2011; and the model Alyssa Miller in 2013. Gyllenhaal has been in a relationship with the model Jeanne Cadieu since 2018.
In 2006, Gyllenhaal and Maggie escaped a fire that destroyed Manka's Inverness Lodge in Inverness, California, where they were vacationing.

Politics
Ahead of the 2004 U.S. presidential election, Gyllenhaal campaigned for Democratic Party presidential nominee John Kerry. He and Maggie also visited the University of Southern California to film a segment for the Oprah Winfrey Show and to urge students to vote. Leading up to the 2018 midterm elections, Gyllenhaal endorsed Stacey Abrams, Andrew Gillum, Beto O'Rourke, Jacky Rosen, and Kyrsten Sinema in their respective U.S. Senate or gubernatorial races.

Advocacy
In 2003, Gyllenhaal participated in an advertising campaign for the American Civil Liberties Union. He has served as the Honorary Chair of the New Eyes for the Needy Advisory Board and has supported the organization Stand Up to Cancer. He has served on the board of directors for the Anti-Recidivism Coalition and has volunteered in California juvenile detention centers with film producer Scott Budnick. In 2014, Gyllenhaal attended an event that benefited the Headstrong Project, an organization that provides treatment to military veterans suffering from post traumatic stress disorder, during which he read a poem by a veteran. In 2017, he participated in a fundraiser to help survivors who lost limbs during the September 11 attacks.
Gyllenhaal has donated money to have trees planted in a Mozambique forest, partly to promote the Future Forests program. After filming The Day After Tomorrow, he flew to the Arctic to raise awareness about climate change. He has described the climate activist Greta Thunberg as an inspiring figure.

Acting credits and accolades
See also
List of actors with Academy Award nominations
List of siblings with Academy Award acting nominations
List of Jewish Academy Award winners and nominees

Notes
References
External links
Jake Gyllenhaal at IMDb 
Jake Gyllenhaal at the Internet Broadway Database 
Jake Gyllenhaal at the Internet Off-Broadway Database (archived) 
Jake Gyllenhaal at the TCM Movie Database (archived) 
 Media related to Jake Gyllenhaal at Wikimedia Commons