Nathaniel Arcand (born November 13, 1971) is a Canadian actor. He is known for his first major role in the Canadian drama series North of 60, in which for three seasons he played William MacNeil, a smart-mouthed, cocky, troubled, and misunderstood teen. In 1997, he was nominated for a Gemini Award in the category "Best Performance by an Actor in a Featured Supporting Role in a Dramatic Series" for the North of 60 episode "Traces and Tracks."

Life and career
He was raised in Edmonton, Alberta. He is Nēhilawē (Plains Cree), from the Buffalo Lake Metis Settlement. Essential supports throughout his life are Nathaniel's mother and his great grandparents. Nathaniel has one daughter, Trisha O'Chiese, and two sons, Jaden Plaizier and Griffin Powell-Arcand. Griffin is also an actor.
One of Arcand's most recent roles is Mato Summerhill in My Life with the Walter Boys, a Netflix TV series. One of Arcand's longest running roles is that of Scott Cardinal on the CBC series Heartland. Also in television, Nathaniel portrays Victor Merasty on Blackstone, "an unmuted exploration of First Nations’ power and politics" set in a small Plains Cree community. In one of his latest film roles, Arcand portrays Nathan in the comedic drama Two Indians Talking, which won the 2010 Vancouver International Film Festival Most Popular Canadian Film Award.
In 2025 he was announced as having a supporting role in the upcoming television series adaptation of Bon Cop, Bad Cop.

Filmography
Films
Television
Awards and recognition
Best Supporting Actor, American Indian Film Festival 2005 for Johnny Tootall
Performing Arts Award, Aboriginal Role Models of Alberta 2006
Best Actor Nomination, Winnipeg Aboriginal Film Festival 2010 for Two Indians Talking
Best Actor Nomination, American Indian Motion Picture 2010 for Two Indians Talking

Trivia
Nathaniel Arcand is a lead character in both the film Two Indians Talking by director Sara McIntyre and in the television series Blackstone.  In both the film and the television series, he shares the screen with two of the same actors: Carmen Moore and Justin Rain.

References
External links
Kiss Dust Pictures
Blackstone Official Website
Nathaniel Arcand's profile at Northernstars.ca
Article about Arcand in I Heart Edmonton blog
Nathaniel Arcand at IMDb