Tohokushinsha Film Corporation (株式会社東北新社, Kabushiki gaisha Tōhokushinsha) is a Japanese film distributor, production company and dubbing studio based in Akasaka, Minato, Tokyo. It was founded in 1961 by Banjirō Uemura (who was also once the head of the Japanese branch of ITC Entertainment) as a dubbing house for foreign films; members of the Uemura family continue as its largest shareholders.
The company name "Tohokushinsha" comes from the Shiki Theatre Company, which was made by founder Uemura from Higashitakizawa Village.

History
On April 6, 1961, Banjirō Uemura established the company following the split of Tohoku Publishing and transferred the company, which continue to dub and license foreign television films into Japanese.
In 1971, Tokohushinsha started the video editing and post-production business. It later acquired shares of National Bussan, a supermarket operator in Azabu. In partnership with Nippon Sunrise, they established the anime and film production conglomerate Shōeisha (later Cente Studio) to handle anime production.
In 1976, Tohokushinsha broke down after a conflict with Nippon Sunrise, which the company had spun off into a fully-owned Nippon Sunrise, Inc. (now Bandai Namco Filmworks), changing its name.
In 1984, Tohokushinsha started the CG production business.

Anime
Adventures of the Little Koala
Aikatsu Planet!
Amon Saga
Appleseed
Assemble Insert
Brave Raideen
Garo series
Gundam Reconguista in G
Lupin III: The Castle of Cagliostro
Lupin the 3rd: The Mystery of Mamo
Lupin III: Bye Bye, Lady Liberty
Lupin III: Green vs. Red
Mr Locomotive
Mobile Suit Gundam Unicorn RE:00096
Mary and the Witch's Flower
Mai Mai Miracle
New Tetsujin-28
Paranoia Agent
Patlabor
Patlabor: The Movie
Patlabor 2: The Movie
WXIII: Patlabor the Movie 3
Ray the Animation
Saikano
Saikano: Another Love Song
Sherlock Hound
Spirited Away
Space Adventure Cobra: The Movie
Tachiguishi-Retsuden
Tetsuko no Tabi
Tweeny Witches
The Wind Rises
Windy Tales

Films
Aikatsu Planet! The Movie
Fine, Totally Fine
Hasami Otoko
Lost in Translation
Lovely Complex
Marie Antoinette (distributed for Japanese release)
Message from Space (with Toei Company)
Mechanical Violator Hakaider (with Toei Company)
Onmyoji
Onmyoji 2
Shark Skin Man and Peach Hip Girl
Somewhere (distributed for Japanese release)

Games
Crash Bandicoot 2: Cortex Strikes Back
Crash Nitro Kart
Dark Cloud
Final Fantasy XV
Final Fantasy XVI
Ico
Kinect Disneyland Adventures
The Last Guardian
Lupin the 3rd: Treasure of the Sorcerer King
Mister Mosquito
Ni No Kuni: Wrath of the White Witch
Novastorm
Shadow of the Colossus
Soulcalibur IV
Sonic Generations
Sonic Adventure DX: Director's Cut
Soulcalibur Legends
SkyGunner
Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots
Ultraman Powered
Sonic The Hedgehog (2006)

Live-action series
GARO
Aikatsu Planet!

References
External links
(in Japanese) Tohokushinsha Film Corporation
(in English) Tohokushinsha corporate information